AMBER HINDS: WordPress
Accessibility Day 2023:
Ask Organizers Anything
AMA, Lightning Talk -
With Joe Dolson, Ryan Bracey,
Nick Croft and Amber Hinds,
Organizers of WordPress
Accessibility Day.
This session was recorded
on September 28th, 2023.
RONAK GANATRA: Thank
you to Equalize Digital
for being the platinum sponsor
of WordPress Accessibility Day.
And now the third session
is about Lightning Talk -
Ask Organizers Anything.
SPEAKER 1: WordPress Accessibility
Day 2023, Organizer AMA.
First off, Luna Barbara asks,
if you were giving advice
to a web developer trying to
start up accessibility initiatives
and projects at their current
job, what advice would you give?
RYAN BRACEY: Hey
there, I'm Ryan Bracey.
If you're looking to introduce
accessibility initiatives
at your company,
the first thing you're going to want
to do is educate yourself on the
basic principles and guidelines
of the Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines or WCAG.
As soon as you introduce this
initiative, you're naturally going
to just become your company's
go-to accessibility expert.
So building a really solid
knowledge foundation is going
to be really critical
to your success here.
It's also important to
remember that accessibility
isn't a perfect science,
it's more like a moving target.
So staying up to date on
emerging trends is going
to be really important as well.
Make sure you participate in meetups,
attend conferences like this one,
and join some community
Slack channels.
All of this is going to really
give you invaluable knowledge
and insight as things
evolve over time.
Once you have that foundation set,
and you go to present this initiative
to your team, remember you're now
your company's accessibility advocate
and your team is going to be
looking to you for guidance.
So start educating them on
the importance, the benefits,
and the consequences of accessibility
compliance, and then try
to connect these principles back
to what their specific roles
and deliverables are
within their teams.
You'll also want to set some clear
accessibility goals for your company,
and then start helping the
different departments develop
their own processes on how to
best integrate accessibility
into their own work.
Most of all, you really always
want to be communicating.
Try to create a dedicated
space such as a Slack channel
if you have a company,
Slack workspace,
somewhere where you can share
knowledge, ask questions,
and just foster discussion
amongst each other.
By following this advice
and constantly advocating
for accessibility
within your company,
you'll be able to
create a significant
and positive impact on just
the overall inclusivity
of the work your company creates.
SPEAKER 1: Tom asks,
how would a deaf or hard
of hearing person know if captions
omitted words, particularly
if the speaker is not visible?
I am concerned about the potential
for trouble when seeing do,
when the speaker
actually meant do not.
JOE DOLSON: Hi,
this is Joe Dolson.
This is why accurate
captions are important.
The WCAG guidelines don't
explicitly say that captions need
to be accurate, but I'd argue
that if a caption isn't accurate,
then it isn't a caption.
The definition of a caption
in HTML5 is, a transcription
or translation of the dialogue,
sound effects, relevant musical cues,
and other relevant audio information
when sound is unavailable
or not clearly audible.
Transcription is a
precise reproduction
of the meaningful spoken text.
Translation is a
faithful reproduction
of the meaning of that text
in another language.
In either case,
accuracy is a fundamental part
of what makes that text meaningful.
Live captioning, because it is done
in real time, will contain mistakes.
But for any pre-recorded video,
if you don't take the opportunity
to ensure accuracy, you're explicitly
discriminating against deaf
and hard of hearing populations.
SPEAKER 1: Whitney asks,
what steps would you recommend
a quality assurance
software tester interested
in 508 compliance testing
take, to get more experience
in accessibility testing?
NICK CROFT: Hey,
this is Nick Croft.
I've got a 508 trusted
tester certification.
To do that, I went to this website.
It is www.dhs.gov/508-training.
And on this website,
it has some information
about the trusted
tester training track,
some accessibility documents
training, and other resources.
So I highly recommend
visiting this website.
But the other great thing
here, this link
that says the new DHS training
self-enrollment portal.
If you click on that,
you can go create a login
with their training portal and
fill out all the information.
Go through the steps, and it takes
you through a whole training course.
The training course will
teach you to use the tools
that they've created, and teach
you to use the testing methods
that you have to
follow for 508 testing.
And then at the end of that,
you take a series of tests
as you go through and
you take the final test
and they will issue certification.
Through doing this, it teaches
you the compliance criteria
that they follow for
508 certification,
and teaches you the exact methods
and tools that you need to
use to verify compliance.
I hope that helps.
SPEAKER 1: Chelsea asks, if we
use plug-ins, we run into features
within the plug-ins
not being accessible
and not having the access we need
to fix accessibility
issues directly.
Do you have any favorite
lists or resources
to check on specific
plugin recommendations
or known plug-in issues?
AMBER: Hi, I'm Amber
Hinds, and I'm happy
to answer this question about whether
or not there is a recommended list
of plugins.
But before I get to that list
of plugins, I want to start
by talking about some of the caveats,
or why it's really complicated
to create a list of plugins
that are accessible.
First of all,
there are a lot of plug-ins
that may have a very
accessible front-end output
or perhaps they have
zero front-end output
and they don't impact the
front-end of your website at all,
but they have very
inaccessible back-ends.
So if you're starting to
think about what is a list
of accessible plug-ins we can use, I
think the first thing you would need
to know is whether you're
looking for plug-ins
that create accessible
front-ends or plug-ins
that also have an accessible
admin interface for people
with disabilities who may be
editing your WordPress website.
And then once you know
that, I think the next thing
that you really have to keep in
mind and what further complicates
creating this list is that
there are many WordPress plugins
that are accessible but only
with specific configurations
or settings enabled in that plugin.
And then of course we know
in WordPress things are
constantly changing.
There's always plug-in updates
and things that are being modified
in plugins.
And so creating a list of
accessible plug-ins is something
that could change.
There could be a website that
was very accessible today,
and I'll put it on the list
and then they release an update
and it's not going to be
accessible tomorrow or vice versa.
There could be one that I
go, I look at and I assess
and I say, oh,
this doesn't work very well,
and then they release a giant
accessibility improvement update,
and now it works perfectly.
Keep in mind also that there
is a just a sheer number
of WordPress plug-ins
that are available.
So I always have a hard time
when people ask me this,
which page builder do you
recommend, for example.
Well, I haven't tried all the
page builders, so it's really hard
for me to go out and say,
this one is the best,
because how can I say it's the best
if I haven't tried all of them?
And so just the reality of
WordPress and how many plug-ins
there are there, there might be
plug-ins that are really fabulous
that I have just never
tested for accessibility.
Now that said,
I don't want to leave you
with a super roundabout
answer and nothing concrete.
So what we have done,
and we will put a link to this
in the chat so that everyone
can have it as a reference.
On the main WordPress Accessibility
Day website, not the 2023 one,
but the main one, we have a
post up called, Plug-ins We Use
and this includes a list
of all of the plug-ins
that are currently active
on the 2023 event site.
So if you're interested in
that, you can go check that out.
SPEAKER 1: Taeke asks,
Dark Mode, Yay or Nay?
Is Dark Mode a fancy feature
or a web accessibility must?
NICK: Hopefully you have seen the
WordPress Accessibility Day website,
and we created this with
Dark Mode and Light Mode.
I can toggle this off,
and you get the Light Mode setting
and then toggle it back on.
With Dark Mode, it's best if
we listen to the user's request
so you can set prefers Dark Color
Scheme, prefers Light Color Scheme,
and enable that.
And we can do that
via media queries,
and we can also get that
information in JavaScript.
With this website, we also added
the ability to switch modes,
and that's not necessary.
And in some cases, a lot of users
don't really switch back and forth
between different things,
but having the ability
to honor the user's request is
important for accessibility.
I did a big talk about this with the
WordPress Accessibility Meetup Group.
So in the WordPress Accessibility
Meetup Group, you can search
for past events and find Dark,
Light, and Inverted Developers Guide
to Color Modes with Nick Croft.
It's got some information
on here about that.
And then if you scroll in
and look for the comments,
there's a comment that says,
find the recap here, which takes you
to the page on
equalizeddigital.com.
On this page, it's also dark, light,
and inverted, developers guide
to color modes with Nick Croft.
And got a little bit of information
about here, about the meetup,
and then down at the bottom,
you can watch the recording.
In this recording, I go into a lot
of details about the importance
of using media queries
to honor user requests,
and how that is an
accessibility bonus for people.
For me, I prefer dark
mode as a personal thing.
And it is not detrimental to
my ability to consume content.
For some other users,
dark mode is extremely important
to their ability
to consume content.
Light sensitivity and other
disabilities can make it difficult
for them to use a very bright
background like this with white text,
where a dark mode background,
more like what we have
on the WordPress Accessibility
Day website, works great for them.
So I do believe that it is
a web accessibility benefit,
but it is not currently something
that will cause your site to fail
and accessibility.
So this is a bonus
that we give to users.
As things evolve and grow in the
future, we may see changes to that,
but right now it's definitely worth
investigating and starting to use.
Hope that helps.
SPEAKER 1: Chris asks,
do you have any data
about motor function disability
being able to mouse and hit targets?
JOE: This is a complicated
question to unpack.
First, what data is important here?
There's data about
people who have gross
or fine motor function impairments,
but that doesn't tell us much
about their use of a computer.
We could go looking for
data on what percentage
of these users are able to use a
mouse, but practically speaking,
that's most of them.
A lot of standard mice have a high
precision mode that slows travel
and makes it easier
to target objects.
Assistive technology
includes a wide variety
of different pointing devices,
including track balls, joysticks,
switches, track pads.
All of those can be used to
point at an object on a screen
and hit a target.
As a result, people with motor
disabilities are quite likely
to be able to use a mouse,
at least in some sense of the word.
I wrote an article a few
years ago about the myth
of the keyboard-only user.
We work very hard in accessibility to
make everything keyboard accessible
so that you can use every
single part of a website
or an application
using the keyboard.
However, this isn't really
about some theoretical user
who can't use a pointing device.
It's about time and efficiency.
People with motor disabilities may
struggle to change interface modes.
If you're currently
using a pointing device,
you use the pointing device, but if
you're currently using a keyboard,
maybe it costs you 15 minutes
and a spoon to switch modes.
So if a control can only be used
with a pointer, you can use it.
But what's the cost?
The point of making everything
keyboard accessible is
that a user should be able to
use any control with the tool
of their choice.
So getting back to
that data question,
I think the most useful data would
be an appraisal of time lost.
How much time has it cost this user
because they could only use a control
with a mouse?
Even if each individual action
is only a few seconds lost,
that aggregate loss of
time could be enormous.
Data about motor function
impairments that impact the use
of computers is underrepresented
in common data sets.
The CDC,
or Center for Disease Control,
publishes a data
collection standard.
It's the six standard
disability questions
or the Washington group questions.
That doesn't capture this
information in any way.
It is focused on motor
disabilities that impact walking
and moving around or showering
and specific activities,
but it doesn't cover computers.
So effectively, I don't have
any useful data about this.
If I was looking for it, I'd be
comparing the time to complete tasks
for users with motor
function impairments
against a control baseline,
so that we could really get a
sense of what the overall time cost
for these users is.
SPEAKER 1: And Arnetia asks,
there are so many WordPress themes
to choose from, and I would
assume that some are built
with accessibility in
mind while others are not.
Do you have any tips for finding and
choosing a more accessible theme?
What criteria should average
WordPress users look for
when choosing a theme?
AMBER: A good place to start
is looking at the requirements
of the accessibility ready tag.
The accessibility ready tag is
something I think developers
who are submitting free plugins
WordPress.org can optionally go
through a review in
order to get that tag.
And I'm not saying you have to
start with one of those themes.
What I'm saying is you can
go in the developer handbook
and you can find what the
criteria is in order for someone
to get the accessibility ready tag.
And then that might tell you what
things you would want to look for
in a theme as a baseline.
Now, I want to be really clear, like
those are really just a baseline.
It's not going to give you 100%
the best most accessible starter
if you only look for those things,
but I think that is a good place
to start.
Things that I would look for if
I'm assessing a theme is one,
does it have skip to content links?
Two, does it have a
clear focus indicator?
So you'd hit the tab key
and you would just tab
through the website
from top to bottom.
You want to be able to see
that outline and then you want
to see that it goes in order.
Now, if you know CSS, and you're
comfortable with editing CSS,
you can pick a theme
that doesn't have that
because that's maybe a
two second fix, right?
To add that outline in.
But if you're someone who
doesn't know CSS and you're going
to use a theme out of the box,
then you would want to try
and find a theme that
already has a theme.
Another thing that I would do is I
would test out the navigation menus.
And most of the
non-block based themes
and navigation menus are
controlled by the theme.
So you want to make sure that
you can access all of every item
in the drop-down.
If you don't know how to do
styles, then of course you want
to look for a theme that
has good color contrast.
If you know how to do styles,
then I sort of disregard
any sort of color contrast issues
in a theme because I just think,
OK, well,
I'll just recolor it when I use it.
I would say in general, really
trying to separate what you need
from that theme versus what's
going to come in a plug-in.
So there are some themes out
there that are built with...
they have custom builders or it's
a theme and it includes a form.
I would always recommend that
someone go choose a form plug-in,
and use a form plug-in,
instead of allowing their theme
to create their contact
form, for example.
You're more likely to have
better accessibility output
if you choose a plug-in that focuses
on that one thing versus trying
to get a theme that can do
all those things for you.
Another thing along those same lines
is, I would tend to choose a theme
that is more basic, and I don't
mean that it can't be styled
and look really professional.
It can be styled and look really
professional, but choose a theme
that doesn't have a lot
of interactive elements.
It doesn't need to have things
fading up as you scroll or flying in
from the left or the right.
Maybe don't have a carousel.
There's a lot of data out there
that carousels are not required
and in fact people don't interact
with them or they don't like them
or they cause problems on mobile.
So I wouldn't choose a
theme where the whole top
of the homepage won't look good
if there's not a carousel there.
I hope that gives you
a good starting point.
If you have additional questions,
feel free to put them in the chat
and we will definitely
answer them as we go.
RONAK: OK, thank you.
So we'll be on break after this
session and you can see the updates
on the website which I am
posting in the chat as well
on the 2023.wpaaccessibility.
[Inaudible 19:01]
Thank you, bye.
AMBER: Thank you to WordPress
Accessibility Day 2023 Sponsors.
Platinum Sponsor -
Equalize Digital.
Equalize Digital's
accessibility checker plugin
is an automated
accessibility scanning tool
that helps WordPress websites
become and stay accessible.
Platinum Sponsor - Gravity forms.
Gravity forms is the professional
form builder that you need
to create beautiful,
powerful and accessible forms.
Gold sponsors - 20i, Deque,
Empire Caption Solutions, Pressable,
and WP Engine.
Silver sponsors - Code Geek, Drake
Cooper, GoDaddy, LoneRock Point,
NerdPress, Overnight website by
Kinetic Iris, Raiola Networks,
A11Y Collective, and The Blogsmith.
Bronze sponsors - ExcessaCart,
GreenGeeks Web Hosting,
Hall Analysis SEO Consulting,
HDC, ITX, Ivy Cat, MetaBox,
Pixel Chefs, Simply Schedule
Appointments, SiteGround,
Termageddon, Underrepresented
in Tech, Weglot, and Yoast.